.TH SCHEDCTL-STATUS 1 "2026-05-02" "schedctl" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
schedctl-status \- report what schedctl is managing and the kernel sched_ext state
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B schedctl status
[\fB\-o\fR \fIformat\fR | \fB\-\-output\fR=\fIformat\fR]
[\fB\-d\fR \fIdriver\fR | \fB\-\-driver\fR=\fIdriver\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B schedctl status
reports the scheduler currently managed by schedctl, including the
container image and digest it was started from, the start time, the
container runtime in use, and the attachment state reported by the
kernel via
.IR /sys/kernel/sched_ext/ .
.PP
This is the bridge between
.B schedctl run
and
.B schedctl stop
\(em it tells the user what state schedctl believes it is in,
without falling back to
.BR podman\ ps
or reading sysfs directly.
.PP
The command surfaces discrepancies between schedctl's view of the
world and the kernel's view as a non-zero exit. For example, if the
kernel reports a sched_ext scheduler attached but no container is
managed by schedctl, that is reported as
.B orphaned-kernel-state
rather than silently treated as idle.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output =\fIformat\fR
Output format. One of
.B text
(default, human-readable summary) or
.B json
(stable schema, see
.B JSON OUTPUT
below).
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-driver =\fIdriver\fR
Container runtime to query. One of
.B podman
(default) or
.BR containerd .
Inherited from the global
.B \-\-driver
flag.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
A scheduler is running normally, or no scheduler is running. Both
states are reported with a clear message and exit zero.
.TP
.B 1
Generic error. The container runtime could not be queried, the
.B \-\-output
value is invalid, or another setup-level failure occurred.
.TP
.B 2
Discrepancy between schedctl's view and the kernel's view. The
.B status
field in the report identifies which kind of discrepancy was
detected (see
.B STATUS VALUES
below).
.SH STATUS VALUES
The
.B status
field takes one of the following stable string values. These
values are part of the JSON schema and will not be renamed without
a schema version bump.
.TP
.B idle
No managed scheduler and the kernel reports no attached ops. Exit 0.
.TP
.B running
A managed scheduler is running and the kernel reports a matching
attached ops. Exit 0.
.TP
.B orphaned-kernel-state
The kernel reports a sched_ext ops attached, but schedctl is not
managing any scheduler. Indicates a scheduler started outside
schedctl, or schedctl-managed state was lost. Exit 2.
.TP
.B managed-detached
schedctl is managing a scheduler container but the kernel reports
no ops attached. Likely the container is running but has not
attached its BPF program, or it crashed without cleaning up. Exit 2.
.TP
.B managed-mismatch
schedctl is managing a scheduler container, the kernel reports
a different ops attached than the one schedctl expected. Exit 2.
.TP
.B multiple-managed
schedctl is managing more than one scheduler container. Only one
sched_ext scheduler can be attached at a time. Exit 2.
.SH JSON OUTPUT
.B \-\-output json
emits a single JSON document on stdout. The schema is versioned
through the
.B schema_version
field; consumers should reject documents whose
.B schema_version
does not match a version they understand.
.PP
.B Top-level fields:
.RS
.TP
.B schema_version
String. The current value is
.BR "1" .
Bumped on any breaking change.
.TP
.B status
String. One of the values listed under
.BR "STATUS VALUES" .
.TP
.B driver
String. The container runtime that was queried
.RB ( podman
or
.BR containerd ).
.TP
.B scheduler
Object. Present iff schedctl is managing exactly one scheduler. See
.B "Scheduler object"
below. Omitted otherwise.
.TP
.B kernel
Object. Always present. See
.B "Kernel object"
below.
.TP
.B discrepancy
String. Present iff
.B status
indicates a discrepancy. Carries a human-readable description.
Omitted when
.B status
is
.B idle
or
.BR running .
.RE
.PP
.B Scheduler object:
.RS
.TP
.B name
String. The container/scheduler name as schedctl knows it
(e.g.
.IR scx_rusty ).
.TP
.B container_id
String. The container ID assigned by the runtime.
.TP
.B image
String. Image reference the container was started from.
.TP
.B image_id
String. Image digest. Omitted when the runtime did not surface one.
.TP
.B pid
Number. Host PID of the container's primary process.
.TP
.B started_at
String, RFC 3339 timestamp in UTC.
.RE
.PP
.B Kernel object:
.RS
.TP
.B supported
Boolean.
.B true
iff
.I /sys/kernel/sched_ext
exists.
.TP
.B enabled
Boolean.
.B true
iff
.I /sys/kernel/sched_ext/state
reads as
.IR enabled .
.TP
.B ops
String. Contents of
.IR /sys/kernel/sched_ext/root/ops ,
or the empty string when no ops are attached.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Human-readable status:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ schedctl status
scheduler running: scx_rusty
  driver:     podman
  container:  3a7f...
  image:      ghcr.io/sched-ext/scx_rusty:latest
  digest:     sha256:abcd...
  pid:        4242
  started:    2026-05-02T10:30:00Z
  kernel:     enabled, ops=rusty
.fi
.RE
.PP
JSON output for scripts:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ schedctl status --output json | jq -r .status
running
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR schedctl (1),
.BR schedctl-run (1),
.BR schedctl-stop (1)
